HOW TO FIX TRANSPARENCY ISSUES

Usually transparency works as expected in Panda automatically, but
sometimes it just seems to go awry, where a semitransparent object in
the foreground seems to partially obscure a semitransparent object
behind it.  This is especially likely to happen with large flat
polygon cutouts, or when a transparent object is contained within
another transparent object, or when parts of a transparent object can
be seen behind other parts of the same object.

The fundamental problem is that correct transparency, in the absence
of special hardware support involving extra framebuffer bits, requires
drawing everything in order from farthest away to nearest.  This means
sorting each polygon--actually, each pixel, for true correctness--into
back-to-front order before drawing the scene.

It is, of course, too expensive to split up every transparent object
into individual pixels or polygons for sorting individually, so Panda
sorts objects at the Geom level, according to the center of the
bounding volume.  This works well 95% of the time.

You run into problems with large flat polygons, though, since these
tend to have parts that are far away from the center of their bounding
volume.  The bounding-volume sorting is especially likely to go awry
when you have two or more large flats close behind the other, and you
view them from slightly off-axis.  (Try drawing a picture, of the two
flats as seen from the top, and imagine yourself viewing them from
different directions.  Also imagine where the center of the bounding
volumes is.)

Now, there are a number of solutions to this sort of problem.  No one
solution is right for every situation.

First, the easiest thing to do is to use M_dual transparency.  This is
a special transparency mode in which the completely invisible parts of
the object aren't drawn into the Z-buffer at all, so that they don't
have any chance of obscuring things behind them.  This only works well
if the flats are typical cutouts, where there is a big solid part
(alpha == 1.0) and a big transparent part (alpha == 0.0), and not a
lot of semitransparent parts (0.0 < alpha < 1.0).  It is also a
slightly more expensive rendering mode than the default of M_alpha, so
it's not enabled by default in Panda.  But egg-palettize will turn it
on automatically for a particular model if it detects textures that
appear to be cutouts of the appropriate nature, which is another
reason to use egg-palettize if you are not already.

Second, an easy thing to do is to chop up one or both competing models
into smaller pieces, each of which can be sorted independently by
Panda.  For instance, you can split one big polygon into a grid of
little polygons, and the sorting is more likely to be accurate for
each piece (because the center of the bounding volume is closer to the
pixels).  You can draw a picture to see how this works.  In order to
do this properly, you can't just make it one big mesh of small
polygons, since Panda will make a mesh into a single Geom of
tristrips; instead, it needs to be separate meshes, so that each one
will become its own Geom.  Obviously, this is slightly more expensive
too, since you are introducing additional vertices and adding more
objects to the sort list; so you don't want to go too crazy with the
smallness of your polygons.

A third option is simply to disable the depth write on your
transparent objects.  This is most effective when you are trying to
represent something that is barely visible, like glass or a soap
bubble.  Doing this doesn't improve the likelihood of correct sorting,
but it will tend to make the artifacts of an incorrect sorting less
obvious.  You can achieve this by using the transparency option
"blend_no_occlude" in an egg file, or by explicitly disabling the
depth write on a loaded model with node_path.set_depth_write(false).
You should be careful only to disable depth write on the transparent
pieces, and not on the opaque parts.

A final option is to make explicit sorting requests to Panda.  This is
often the last resort because it is more difficult, but it does have
the advantage of not adding additional performance penalties to your
scene.  It only works well when the transparent objects can be sorted
reliably with respect to everything else behind them.  For instance,
clouds in the sky can reliably be drawn before almost everything else
in the scene, except the sky itself.  Similarly, a big flat that is up
against an opaque wall can reliably be drawn after all of the opaque
objects, but before any other transparent object, regardless of where
the camera happens to be placed in the scene.  See
howto.control_render_order.txt for more information about explicitly
controlling the rendering order.
